hi this is presto Walker how many
squares are in this picture give this
problem a try and when you're ready keep
watching the video for the solution one
way to solve this problem is by counting
the number of squares very carefully
we'll remove the two squares that are in
the middle to be left with a four by
four grid now we'll count the number of
squares of different sizes there's
exactly one square that's four by four
that's the big square and then we'll
count down the number of squares of
smaller sizes the number of 3x3 squares
can be found that there are two squares
per row and we can count this for two
different rows so there are two times
two or four different squares of 3x3
sighs how many 2x2 squares are there in
a given row we can place three 2x2
squares and there are three different
rows that we can create squares so there
will be 3 times 3 which is 9 2 by 2
squares
finally we count the number 1 by 1
squares there are 4 different squares in
a row and we're going to have 4
different rows that we can do this so
there will be 4 times 4 which equals 16
1 by 1 squares we now place the two
squares in the middle back together and
we count the number of more squares that
they add the number of big squares that
they add in the middle will be equal to
2 and now they'll add some salt small
squares in the middle each of these
squares is going to contribute for more
small squares and they're two of these
so this will contribute 8 more squares
in total we add up all of these numbers
and we've counted that there are 40
squares in this picture did you figure
it out now there's a shortcut we could
use if we're going to do problems like
this if you have an N by n grid there
will be 1 squared plus 2 squared plus
all the way up to N squared number of
squares we found this already that the
number of 4x4 squares was 1 which equals
1 squared the number of 3x3 squares was
which equals 2 squared the number of 2x2
squares remembered there were 9 because
there were 3 squares per row and 3 rows
and the number of 1 by 1 squares was 16
because there were 4 per row and there
were 4 rows we could have started out by
counting this without even doing the
count of the squares just using this
formula and then we would have had to
add on the number of squares created by
the squares in the middle which would
have been 10 and that would have again
got us to the answer 40 so you could
intuitively see why this formula is true
you count the number of squares created
per row and the number of rows you have
but let me just provide another proof
we'll use induction so we'll assume the
formula is true for N and we'll prove
it's true for n plus 1 so we have an N
by n grid and we're going to add on 1 by
1 squares on the side so that we have an
n plus 1 times n plus 1 grid by the
induction hypothesis the N by n grid has
a total number of hidden squares of 1
squared plus 2 squared all the way up to
n squared number of squares so now we
need to see the number of new squares we
can create by the squares we've added on
we first count the number of 1 by 1
squares we've added on you can count
this by saying there's n plus 1 squared
minus N squared or 2 n plus 1 squares
another way to see this is you're adding
on n plus 1 squares to the row n plus 1
into the column but the one in the
corner is going to be Mutual so you have
2n plus 2 minus 1 which is again equal
to 2n plus 1 now you want to count the
number of 2x2 squares that you can
create this will be 2 fewer and the
number of 3x3 squares will also be 2
fewer and this pattern continues and you
can add on exactly one square that size
n plus 1 by n plus 1 so the total number
of squares we can add on is the sum of
the odd numbers up to 2n plus 1 and
that's a well-known formula of n plus 1
squared so we've added on a total number
of n plus 1 squared number of squares so
in total in an n plus 1 times n plus 1
grid we have the same formula plus n
plus 1 squared and that completes the
induction thanks for watching this video
please
subscribe to my channel I make videos on
math and game theory you can catch
around my blog mind your decisions which
you can follow on Facebook Google+ and
patreon you can catch me on social media
at pressure Locker and if you liked this
video please check out my books there
are links in the video description